The wood frog Rana sylvatica is well known for the ability to survive whole body freezing when winter temperatures fall below 0°C. Frogs endure the conversion of 65-70% of total body water to ice and may remain frozen for weeks at a time. Adaptations that support freeze tolerance include synthesis of high concentrations of glucose as a cryoprotectant, management of ice formation, well-developed tolerances for the ischemia/anoxia and cell dehydration/shrinkage that are caused by the formation of ice in extracellular spaces, freeze-responsive changes in signal transduction and gene expression, and metabolic rate depression (MRD) that strongly reduces net energy consumption in the frozen state. In particular, coordinated MRD both suppresses overall ATP consumption and reprioritizes the use of ATP to support basic survival requirements while inhibiting many optional biological events including global suppression of ATP-expensive processes such as protein synthesis, gene expression, etc.  
The cell cycle is one of the major ATP expenditures of organisms and supports proliferation/replacement of cells as well as growth and development. Cell cycle progression depends on Cyclins and Cdks (cyclin-dependent kinase) that assemble reversibly at different cell cycle stages to form complexes. Cyclins act as the regulator of their corresponding Cdk to promote its kinase activity at a specific stage of the cell cycle. In G1 phase, G1/S transition and S phase of the cell cycle in higher eukaryotes, Cdk 2, 4,6 along with A, D and E type Cyclins play crucial roles, whereas the Cdc2 (also known as Cdk1) - Cyclin B complex is vital to G2/M phase transition (this complex is also known as M-phase promoting factor). Cdk-Cyclin complexes are subject to regulation by phosphorylation events on Cdks. One critical step of Cdk activation is dephosphorylation at Thr14 and/or Tyr15 by the phosphatases Cdc25a and Cdc25c, whose activities are also heavily dependent on phosphorylation which is conducted by kinase signaling pathways. Another major group regulating Cdk-Cyclin complex formation and activity are the CDKIs (Cdk inhibitor). Two key members of the CIP/KIP family of CDKIs are p21 and p27 that play critical roles in regulating Cdk-Cylin formation; other CDKIs include the INK4 family. Overall, then, Cdks and cyclins along with Cdc25 phosphatases and CIP/KIP CDKIs are essential regulators of cell cycle progression. The present study investigates the effects of whole body freezing and thawing on the protein expression and phosphorylation patterns of these key cell cycle components and regulators in liver of wood frogs. Parallel analyses also evaluate the effects of anoxia and dehydration on cell cycle regulation. 
Survival of freezing in wood frogs R. sylvatica involves two sorts of strategies. Firstly, to maximize survival time of cells and organs under the ischemic, dehydrated conditions of the frozen state, energy expenditures are strongly suppressed by shutting down various ATP-expensive metabolic processes. Secondly, cryoprotective defenses are put in place to protect cells including up-regulation of selected novel proteins, ice-nucleating proteins and production of high levels of the carbohydrate cryoprotectant, glucose. Wood frog liver is strongly involved in orchestrating cryoprotective defenses for the whole animal, particularly in the synthesis and export of huge amounts of glucose that is taken up by all other organs for cryoprotection. Therefore, it is not a surprise that wood frog liver is one of the last organs to freeze. Multiple aspects of liver responses to freezing have been explored on both physiological and biochemical levels. One of the most energy-expensive activities of cells is cell division and studies in a variety of systems have documented cell cycle arrest under many stress conditions (e.g. nutrient or oxygen limitation) and also as an integral part of natural hypometabolic states (hibernation, diapause, etc.). Therefore, cell cycle activity can be considered as one of signature cellular events that reflects both energetics and stress responses in cells and organs. 
The major driving force in cell cycle progression is the sequential formation of various Cdk-Cyclin complexes that function at different stages of the cell cycle, the induction of the appropriate Cyclin protein being the primary influence on complex formation that is required to permit Cdk function. Complexes of particular Cdk-Cyclin combinations are only present during their corresponding functional phases under controls from cell signaling networks and through post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation. In higher eukaryotes systems, over 10 Cdks have been discovered; among them are Cdc 2, Cdk 2, 4 and 6 as four essential Cdks directly involved in regulating the progression of different phases as well as phase transitions. When triggered by signaling systems, cell cycle starts with the formation of type D Cyclin-Cdk complexes. Cyclin D (including isoforms D1, D2 and D3) interacts with Cdk 4 and 6 during G1 phase resulting in Cdk-mediated phosphorylation of Rb (retinoblastoma) family members including Rb, p107 and p130. Unphosphorylated Rb forms a complex with E2F that suppresses the activity of this transcription factor. This inhibitory effect of Rb on E2F is relieved by hyperphosphorylation of Rb proteins by Cyclin D-Cdk 4/6 complexes resulting in the dissociation of Rb proteins from the Rb-E2F complex. Active E2F then promotes transcription of type A and E Cyclins that are used in later stages of cell cycle progression. Cdk 2 forms a complex with Cyclin E to promote the G1/S phase transition and interacts with type A Cyclins throughout S phase to promote DNA synthesis. Cdc 2 then combines with type A Cyclins to initiate S/G2 phase transition. Subsequently, Cdc 2 interacts with Cyclin B to promote M progression. Cdks are also regulated by phosphorylation at Thr14 and Tyr15 in higher eukaryotic systems; phosphorylation leads to conformational changes that disturb the ATP phosphate-binding orientations, causing inhibitory effects on kinase activity. Inhibitory phosphorylation on Cdks has been proposed as one of the timing mechanisms that controls the activation or deactivation of specific Cdk-Cyclin pairs at each stage of the cell cycle. For example, in higher eukaryotes, both Thr14 and Tyr15 sites on Cdc2 are dephosphorylated at the end of G2 phase but are kept phosphorylated at the stages prior to M phase where Cdc 2-Cyclin B activity is not required. Besides, phosphorylation at these sits also contributes to stress responsive cell cycle arrest in multiple species.